Whats new in CubicWeb 3.15
==========================


New functionnalities
--------------------

* XXX david/vmic describe zmq server

* XXX jcr describe zmq communication bus

* Improved WSGI support. While there is still some caveats, most of the code
  which as twisted only is now generic and allows related functionalities to work
  with a WSGI front-end.

* Full undo/transaction support : undo of modification has eventually been
  implemented, and the configuration simplified (basically you activate it or not
  on an instance basis).

API changes
-----------

* The base registry implementation has been moved to a new
  `logilab.common.registry` module (see #1916014). This includes code from :

  * `cubicweb.vreg` (the whole things that was in there)
  * `cw.appobject` (base selectors and all).

  In the process, some renaming was done:

  * the top level registry is now `RegistryStore` (was `VRegistry`), but that
    should not impact cubicweb client code ;

  * former selectors functions are now known as "predicate", though you still use
    predicates to build an object'selector ;

  * for consistency, the `objectify_selector` decoraror has hence be renamed to
    `objectify_predicate` ;

  * on the CubicWeb side, the `selectors` module has been renamed to
    `predicates`.

  Debugging refactoring dropped the more need for the `lltrace` decorator.

  There should be full backward compat with proper deprecation warnings.

  Notice the `yes` predicate and `objectify_predicate` decorator, as well as the
  `traced_selection` function should now be imported from the
  `logilab.common.registry` module.

* XXX pyves describe web auth api change
* XXX pyves describe web test api change


Unintrusive API changes
-----------------------

* new 'ldapfeed' source type, designed to replace 'ldapuser' source with
  data-feed (i.e. copy based) source ideas.

* new 'zmqrql' source type, similar to 'pyrorql' but using ømq instead of Pyro.

* XXX fcayre: new service api
* XXX adim: new ajax controller and ajax function


User interface changes
----------------------

A new 'undohistory' view expose the undoable transactions and give access to undo
some of them.

