3.21 (10 July 2015)
===================

New features
------------

* the datadir-url configuration option lets one choose where static data files
  are served (instead of the default ${base-url}/data/)

* some integrity checking that was previously implemented in Python was
  moved to the SQL backend.  This includes some constraints, and
  referential integrity.  Some consequences are that:

  - disabling integrity hooks no longer disables those checks
  - upgrades that modify constraints will fail when running on sqlite
    (but upgrades aren't supported on sqlite anyway)

  Note: as of 3.21.0, the upgrade script only works on PostgreSQL.  The
  migration for SQLServer will be added in a future bugfix release.

* for easier instance monitoring, cubicweb can regularly dump some statistics
  (basically those exposed by the 'info' and 'gc' views) in json format to a file

User-visible changes
--------------------

* the use of fckeditor for text form fields is disabled by default, to re-enable it simply install the `cubicweb-ckeditor` cube (then `add_cude('ckeditor')` in a migration or in the shell)

* the 'https-deny-anonymous' configuration setting no longer exists

Code movement
-------------

The cubicweb.web.views.timeline module (providing the timeline-json, timeline
and static-timeline views) has moved to a standalone cube_

.. _cube: https://www.cubicweb.org/project/cubicweb-timeline

API changes
-----------

* req.set_cookie's "expires" argument, if not None, is expected to be a
  date or a datetime in UTC.  It was previously interpreted as localtime
  with the UTC offset the server started in, which was inconsistent (we
  are not aware of any users of that API).

* the way to run tests on a postgresql backend has changed slightly, use
  cubicweb.devtools.{start,stop}pgcluster in setUpModule and tearDownModule

* the Connection and ClientConnection objects introduced in CubicWeb 3.19 have
  been unified.  To connect to a repository, use::

    session = repo.new_session(login, password=...)
    with session.new_cnx() as cnx:
        cnx.execute(...)

  In tests, the 'repo_cnx' and 'client_cnx' methods of RepoAccess are now
  aliases to 'cnx'.

Deprecated code drops
---------------------

* the user_callback api has been removed; people should use plain
  ajax functions instead

* the `Pyro` and `Zmq-pickle` remote repository access methods have
  been entirely removed (emerging alternatives such as rqlcontroller
  and cwclientlib should be used instead).  Note that as a side effect,
  "repository-only" instances (i.e. without a http component) are no
  longer possible.  If you have any such instances, you will need to
  rename the configuration file from repository.conf to all-in-one.conf
  and run ``cubicweb-ctl upgrade`` to update it.  Likewise, remote cubicweb-ctl
  shell is no longer available.

* the old (deprecated since 3.19) `DBAPI` api is completely removed

* cubicweb.toolsutils.config_connect() has been removed
